---
path: "/2013/04/30/why-business-types-should-learn-to-code"
title:  "Why Business Types Should Learn to Code"
date: 2013-04-30
description: ""
draft: false
---

Being able to code is pretty cool. It really does feel like a
[superpower](http://youtu.be/nKIu9yen5nc?t=4m50s) to be able to create
something from next to nothing. While it is a great idea for everyone to
learn to code, I think it is not just a good idea, but essential for
entrepreneurs with a business background who want to start something in
the tech space, to learn to code.

For ease of writing I'm going to refer to these people (business guys
with no technology education or know-how) as "business types". In
contrast, techies or "tech types" are tech-entrepreneurs and programmers
in general. There are two important scenarios I want to highlight, where
the lack of technology education on the business types' part can lead to
serious friction.

Scenario 1
----------

First off, we have the business type who sees the tech world ablaze with
success and wants in. They 'ideate' (I'm not a big fan of this word if
you can't tell) constantly until they stumble upon their big idea. What
do they do next? They find someone who can build this for them. If they
can afford to hire a programmer and pay a decent price to get the
product out that's fine. But often, their goal is to bring the techie on
as a co-founder. This is a very common story and one that isn't [well
received](http://martingryner.com/no-i-wont-be-your-technical-co-founder/).

This is a completely acceptable response. A lot of business types think
"Oh I'll just ask someone to build the product for me. I'll give them
equity and they'll be so happy to be a part of this." Building the
product is more than half the work in the early stages and you're pretty
much asking a random person to do all this work for you for nothing.
Time, especially a programmer's time, is a lot of money. Sure there is
equity involved, but that's a great incentive for founders and
co-founders who start things together and are passionate enough about
the project to forgo current earnings for the promise of startup glory.

Instead, learn to code. If you are a business type not currently engaged
in a startup, but want to, then immediately learn to code. There are
plenty of resources out there, I am obviously going to promote
[Treehouse](http://www.teamtreehouse.com).

By learning how to program, even if it is at a very basic level, you are
doing a few things:

-   You're giving yourself, depending on how much you learn, the ability
    to start building out this idea of yours immediately. You can start
    working on a very basic iteration and see how it works.
-   You realize the scope of the project. By understanding what it takes
    to build a web app, or an iOS or Android app, you will realize how
    long it will take to build something like this, what sort of work is
    involved, and what are the technological limitations. Is your idea
    realistic?
-   You appreciate the techie's role in all this and by putting in some
    of the effort, hopefully, you'll start to earn some respect too. If
    you work on the project as far as your knowledge takes you, and then
    try to bring someone else on board, that's completely different than
    asking them to do all the work.

Scenario 2
----------

The second scenario is when a business type is already involved in a
tech company (or any company for that matter), but still doesn't have
much knowledge of what building a tech product means. The underlying
problems are the same; they don't understand the scope of the problem,
the limitations, the timelines, and so on. This problem is more common
within IT departments of non-tech companies. Marketing hands down
something last minute and wants it done in a few days. "Can't you just
build it?"

If any of these business types learned how to code, even at the most
basic level, it would eliminate all sorts of problems. You end up with
better team communication, more respect for one another's roles, and
more realistic deadlines for product teams.

So while it's a great idea for the entire world to be programming
literate, I think that anyone in business who lies on the fringes of
tech, whether they want to start a tech company, or whether they are
work with techies at their day job, should be required to have some
basic programming education.

For the record, I consider myself a business type and I am learning how
to code.