---
path: "/2013/04/15/teachers"
date: "2013-04-15"
title:  "The Importance of Good Teachers"
description: ""
draft: false
---

Teaching yourself seems to be in vogue as of late - partly due to the
rising costs of education, but more due to the ease of access to quality
educational resources. Blog posts proclaiming I taught myself to code in
X days, months, or years always float to the top and are lauded. There's
absolutely nothing wrong with this. Teaching one's self is a great feat - one that takes an immense amount of effort and discipline. People who
have taught themselves tend to understand concepts better and can retain
things longer.

But somewhere along the path, there was a teacher involved. I'm not
referring strictly to a teacher by profession, but a mentor or
individual who passed knowledge on. Someone piqued interest in the
subject enough that we were instilled with an eagerness to learn. Coding
is not easy, and teaching yourself how to code isn't an enjoyable task
by any means (sure you get joy from making things but the headache
brought on by debugging, troubleshooting and reading docs offsets any of
that), yet plenty of people choose to do it at a young age, when the
majority of us are goofing off. This is where teachers serve a very
important role.

There are plenty of examples where people who became skilled (for lack
of a better phrase) at their professions at a young age, or became
interested enough in it to amass the [10,000
hours](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outliers_(book)) of work sufficient
to be good at it, did so because a teacher inspired them and encouraged
them to be. I've come across a
[few](http://ianstormtaylor.com/design-tip-never-use-black/)
[articles](http://www.zdnet.com/i-was-a-teenage-programmer-before-teenage-programmers-were-cool-7000014013/)
that highlight this fact.

Teachers have more experience than we do in the field that we're
learning. If they approach teaching the right way, they have the ability
to instill in us a desire to know more about that subject and an intense
eagerness to learn. They demonstrate to us what we could do and the
knowledge we could amass if we devote ourselves to the subject.

But there's also the opposite kind of teacher. Looking back at my
schooling years, my computer science teacher didn't instill anything but
hatred of the subject in me. Assignments and explanations of topics were
so mind numbingly boring that I thought nothing good could come out of
it. My teacher set me on exactly the opposite life path, than some of
the aforementioned teachers did to their students. It's a dangerous
thing to do. You set so many talented, young minds off of a subject they
would have enjoyed had you taught it right. I don't code for a living
now, nor am I proficient in much, but I actually like it. I finally
understand and am able to 'create something from nothing'. If I had a
better teacher at the time, would I be elsewhere in life? Would I have
accumulated my 10,000 hours?

Good teachers, those who inspire, can lead you down your life's path
pretty early on. However with education under such disrepair, both at
the K-12 and university levels, these role models have become
increasingly harder to find. If you find one, hold on to them and thank
them. They make the learning process much easier. I'm definitely jealous
if you've had one.